Physiological
Measurement




                                                                                                  You may also like
                                                                                                     - Reconstruction of conductivity changes
Temporal image reconstruction in electrical                                                            and electrode movements based on EIT
                                                                                                       temporal sequences
impedance tomography                                                                                   Tao Dai, Camille Gómez-Laberge and
                                                                                                       Andy Adler

                                                                                                     - Beneficial techniques for spatio-temporal
To cite this article: Andy Adler et al 2007 Physiol. Meas. 28 S1                                       imaging in electrical impedance
                                                                                                       tomography
                                                                                                       Alistair Boyle, Kirill Aristovich and Andy
                                                                                                       Adler

                                                                                                     - Imaging of conductivity changes and
View the article online for updates and enhancements.                                                  electrode movement in EIT
                                                                                                       Manuchehr Soleimani, Camille Gómez-
                                                                                                       Laberge and Andy Adler




                             This content was downloaded from IP address 150.131.100.171 on 20/09/2026 at 23:26
IOP PUBLISHING                                                                 PHYSIOLOGICAL MEASUREMENT
Physiol. Meas. 28 (2007) S1–S11                                          doi:10.1088/0967-3334/28/7/S01




Temporal image reconstruction in electrical
impedance tomography
                 Andy Adler1, Tao Dai1 and William R B Lionheart2
                 1 Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada
                 2 School of Mathematics, University of Manchester, UK


                 E-mail: adler@sce.carleton.ca

                 Received 13 December 2006, accepted for publication 3 April 2007
                 Published 26 June 2007
                 Online at stacks.iop.org/PM/28/S1

                 Abstract
                 Electrical impedance tomography (EIT) calculates images of the body from
                 body impedance measurements. While the spatial resolution of these images
                 is relatively low, the temporal resolution of EIT data can be high. Most
                 EIT reconstruction algorithms solve each data frame independently, although
                 Kalman filter algorithms track the image changes across frames. This paper
                 proposes a new approach which directly accounts for correlations between
                 images in successive data frames. Image reconstruction is posed in terms
                 of an augmented image x̃ and measurement vector ỹ, which concatenate
                 the values from the d previous and future frames. Image reconstruction is
                 then based on an augmented regularization matrix R̃, which accounts for a
                 model of both the spatial and temporal correlations between image elements.
                 Results are compared for reconstruction algorithms based on independent
                 frames, Kalman filters and the proposed approach. For low values of the
                 regularization hyperparameter, the proposed approach performs similarly to
                 independent frames, but for higher hyperparameter values, it uses adjacent
                 frame data to reduce reconstructed image noise.


                 Keywords:           electrical impedance tomography, regularization, image
                 reconstruction
                 (Some figures in this article are in colour only in the electronic version)




1. Introduction

Electrical impedance tomography (EIT) calculates an estimate of the conductivity distribution
within a body based on current stimulations and voltage measurements on the body surface.
EIT has fairly low spatial resolution, limited by the low sensitivity of surface measurements
0967-3334/07/070001+11$30.00 © 2007 IOP Publishing Ltd Printed in the UK                             S1
S2                                                                                   A Adler et al

to conductivity changes deep within the body. On the other hand, EIT has excellent temporal
resolution, with some recent systems having frame rates up to 1000/s (Wilkinson et al 2005).
Such high temporal resolution makes EIT a promising technology to monitor fast physiological
events which affect the conductivity distribution. For cardiac activity, the frequency content
of the QRS complex is mainly between 10 and 25 Hz (Kohler et al 2002). Another example
is high frequency ventilation in which air is pumped into the lungs at rates of 5–25 Hz
(with smaller tidal volumes). High frequency ventilation is indicated for many patients with
respiratory distress syndrome since it is understood to place less stress on injured lung tissue
(Eichenwald and Stark 1999). EIT can potentially be of great benefit to these patients, since
the distribution of ventilation in their lungs is highly non-uniform and cannot be otherwise
monitored (Wolf and Arnold 2005).
     Like many biomedical instrumentation techniques, the ability of EIT to see small
physiological changes is limited by the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). A widely used technique
to improve SNR is ensemble averaging, which reduces random noise by the square root of
the number of averaged frames. If EIT data acquisition is sufficiently rapid compared to the
underlying physiological processes to be imaged, then ensemble averaging may be used on
multiple frames of EIT. However, in EIT applications where conductivity changes are very
fast with respect to the EIT frame rate, ensemble averaging is not appropriate, since it will
effectively reduce the temporal resolution. In these cases, each frame of EIT data is typically
reconstructed independently of the others.
     In this paper, we are interested in approaches to image a body which is undergoing
fast changes with respect to the EIT frame rate. In these cases, ensemble averaging is not
appropriate; however, it is clear that individual data frames are not completely independent,
but do contain useful correlations, which could be exploited to improve EIT image noise
performance. We call an approach which uses the time sequence of EIT frame data temporal
image reconstruction.
     Temporal image reconstruction can be represented as a linear tracking problem, and
formulated as an extended Kalman filter, in which the image at each instant is estimated from
the current data and the previous image estimate. Vauhkonen et al (1998a) proposed the first
Kalman filter based algorithm for difference EIT; we describe this approach using the notation
of this paper in section 2.3. More recently, this approach has been extended by Kim et al (2004)
to reconstruct the resistivity of a contrast of known shape and location. Kim et al (2006) also
proposed a computationally efficient algorithm based on pre-computing the Kalman gain and
state estimation matrices. An algorithm for absolute EIT has also been shown for simulation
data (Trigo et al 2004).
     In this paper, we propose a new approach for temporal EIT image reconstruction, which
directly estimates the image at frame t0 from the set of data in a window of frames from
t−d to td . Using these data, the temporal inverse is formulated as an inverse problem with a
regularization prior which accounts for both spatial and temporal correlations between image
elements.

2. Methods

We consider an EIT system with nE electrodes applied to a body using sequential current
stimulation with parallel voltage measurement. Using these electrodes, nE current stimulation
patterns are sequentially applied and nV differential measurements are made for each
stimulation. For an adjacent drive EIT system, voltages are typically not measured at driven
electrodes, and nV = nE − 3. The delay between each successive stimulation pattern is tS ;
thus, a complete set (frame) of EIT measurements takes time tF = nE tS . Each data frame
Temporal image reconstruction in electrical impedance tomography                                      S3

measures a vector, v ∈ RnM , of nM = nE nV data points (some of which are redundant if the
medium is not changing). Difference EIT calculates difference data y, ([y]i = [v2 ]i − [v1 ]i ;
or the normalized difference data [y]i = ([v2 ]i − [v1 ]i )/[v1 ]i ). To improve its precision, v1
is typically averaged over many data frames, at a time when the conductivity distribution may
be assumed to be stable; we thus assume that v1 is noise free.
     The body under investigation is modelled using a finite element model (FEM) which
discretizes the conductivity onto nN piecewise smooth elements, represented by a vector
σ ∈ RnN . (In this paragraph, σ represents conductivity; elsewhere in this paper, σ is
the standard deviation.) Again, difference EIT calculates a vector of conductivity change,
x = σ 2 − σ 1 between the present conductivity distribution, σ 2 , and that at the reference
measurement, σ 1 . For small variations around the reference conductivity σ 1 , the relationship
between x and y can be linearized (giving the difference EIT forward model):
                 y = Jx + n                                                                          (1)
                nM ×nN
where J ∈ R                 is the Jacobian or sensitivity matrix and n ∈ R is the measurement
                                                                              nM

noise which      is assumed      to be uncorrelated white Gaussian. J is calculated from the FEM as
        ∂yi 
Jij = ∂x   j σ1
                 , and  depends       on the FEM, current injection patterns, the reference conductivity,
and the electrode models. This system is underdetermined since nN > nM . This problem
is commonly solved using regularization techniques (e.g. Cheney et al (1990), Adler and
Lionheart (2006)) in order to calculate a conductivity change estimate, x̂, which is both
faithful to the measurements, y, and to a priori constraints on a ‘reasonable’ image.
     Over time steps, k, a sequence of difference vectors, yk = Jxk , are measured (assuming
the body and electrode geometry, and thus J, stay fixed). If the conductivity of the body
under investigation does not change too rapidly, then it is reasonable to expect that a certain
number of measurements, d, into the past and future provide useful information about the
current image. Labelling the current instant as t, we therefore seek to estimate x̂t from data
[yt−d ; . . . ; yt−1 ; yt ; yt+1 ; . . . ; yt+d ].
     In the subsequent sections we consider three traditional approaches and the proposed
temporal inverse; each estimates x̂t at frame t from a sequence of data starting at frame
0, using the indicated data: section 2.1—Gauss–Newton (GN) inverse, using yt only;
section 2.2—GN with weighted data, using a weighted average of yt−d . . . yt+d ; section 2.3—
Kalman filter inverse, using all previous and current data, y0 . . . yt and section 2.4—Temporal
inverse, using yt−d . . . yt+d based on a temporal prior model.

2.1. One-step linear GN (Gauss–Newton) solver
One-step Gauss–Newton (GN) EIT reconstruction approaches have been widely used in EIT
(e.g. Cheney et al (1990), Adler and Guardo (1996)). They allow use of sophisticated
regularized models of the EIT inverse problem, are able to represent this solution as a linear
reconstruction matrix, which can then allow rapid, real-time imaging. The GN inverse problem
seeks to calculate a solution, x̂, to the EIT inverse problem expressed as the minimum of a
sum of quadratic norms
                 y − Jx̂2 −1 + x − x◦ 2 −1                                                     (2)
                              n                x
         ◦
where x represents the expected value of element conductivity changes, which is zero for
difference EIT. Σn ∈ RnM ×nM is the covariance matrix of the measurement noise n. Since n
is uncorrelated, Σn is a diagonal matrix with [Σn ]i,i = σi2 , where σi2 is the noise variance at
measurement i. Σx ∈ RnN ×nN is the expected image covariance.
     Typically, Σn and Σx are not calculated directly. Instead, their inverses, W = σn2 Σ−1   n
and R = σx2 Σ−1 x , are heuristically determined from a priori considerations. Here σn is
S4                                                                                    A Adler et al

the average measurement noise amplitude and σx is the a priori amplitude of conductivity
change. W models the measurement accuracy. For uncorrelated noise, each diagonal element
is proportional to the signal-to-noise ratio. For difference EIT with identical channels, W = I.
The regularization matrix R may be understood to model the ‘unlikelihood’ of image elements.
     By solving (2), a linearized, one-step inverse solution is obtained as
                                        −1
                           1         1            1
                x̂ = JT 2 WJ + 2 R            JT 2 Wy.                                       (3)
                          σn        σx           σn
We define the hyperparameter λ = σn /σx , and rewrite (3) as
               x̂ = (JT WJ + λ2 R)−1 JT Wy = By                                                (4)
where B = (JT WJ + λ2 R)−1 JT W is the linear, one-step inverse. The regularization
hyperparameter λ controls the trade-off between resolution and noise attenuation in the
reconstructed image.
     If image elements are assumed to be independent with identical expected magnitude, R
becomes an identity matrix I and (4) uses zeroth-order Tikhonov regularization. For EIT,
such solutions tend to push reconstructed noise toward the boundary, since the measured data
are much more sensitive to boundary image elements. Instead, R may be scaled with the
                                                                                        p
sensitivity of each element, so that each diagonal element i of R is [R]i,i = [JT J]i,i . This is
the NOSER prior of Cheney et al (1990) for an exponent p = 1. Many other prior matrices
have been proposed: to model image smoothness as a penalty for non-smooth image regions,
R may be set to the discrete Laplacian filter (Vauhkonen et al 1998b) or a discrete high pass
Gaussian filter (Adler and Guardo 1996).
     In this paper, the NOSER prior is used for calculating the matrix R with p = 0.5 in all
tested algorithms, except for the Kalman filtering. Because it is diagonal, R can be inverted
without numerical difficulties. The choice of exponent is a heuristic compromise between the
pushing noise to the boundary (p = 0) or to the centre (p = 1).
     In (4), the term in the inverse is of size nN × nN . To save computational time, and improve
inverse accuracy and stability, we want to decrease the size of the matrix to be inverted. Thus,
we rewrite the matrix B using the data form as:
                                                                       −1 
                                 −1 T            1 T             1 T
              = (J WJ + λ R) J W J 2 PJ + V
                    T         2
                                                               J 2 PJ + V
                                                λ               λ
                                                                          −1
                                                       1 T          1 T
              = (JT WJ + λ2 R)−1 (JT WJ + λ2 R)           PJ      J    PJ + V
                                                      λ2            λ2
             = PJT (JPJT + λ2 V)−1                                                             (5)
              −1
where P = R        = σ12 Σx and V = W−1 = σ12 Σn . In practice, P and V are modelled directly
                       x                    n
from the system covariances, rather than the inverse of R and W. Using (5), the size of the
term in the inverse is reduced to nM × nM . This is especially significant for 3D EIT models
and for the temporal inverse which we introduce below.
    Note that the GN solver does not consider the time sequence of EIT data. Each frame is
solved individually, and inter-frame correlations are ignored.

2.2. One-step linear GN solver with weighted data
The one-step linear GN solver may be applied to weighted average data in order to implement
ensemble averaging. Given a temporal window with a half-width d, we model the time
constant, τ , to represent the rate at which the most rapid changes of interest occur in the body.
Temporal image reconstruction in electrical impedance tomography                            S5

This means that a feature of interest in a frame will dissipate by a factor of γ = exp(−tF /τ )
in the next frame, and by γ d in the dth subsequent frame. Using this factor, we calculate a
weighted ensemble average EIT measurement, ȳ,

                         1  |i|
                             d
                 ȳ =           γ yi                                                        (6)
                        wγ i=−d
             
where wγ = di=−d γ |i| . When 0 < γ < 1, this is a forgetting process, and when γ = 1, an
                                                                √
averaging process. Noise amplitude will decrease by a factor of wγ due to this ensemble
averaging. The GN solver with weighted data reconstructs images as
                 x̂ = Bȳ                                                                   (7)
where B is calculated using (4).


2.3. Kalman solver
The Kalman filter is a widely used approach for many tracking and data prediction tasks. The
EIT image reconstruction algorithm of Vauhkonen et al (1998a) is formulated as an iterative
state estimation problem. The system discrete time prediction model is given by (using the
notation introduced above)
                 xk = Axk−1 + w                                                             (8)
for a discrete time sequence k. A ∈ RnN ×nN is the state transition matrix, and w ∈ RnN is the
state noise (assumed to be zero mean white Gaussian). One traditional difficulty with Kalman
filters is finding values for state space parameters. If the underlying processes in the body
were well known, then A could be derived; for example, in a stirred mixing tank, the process
would rotate image elements in each frame. We follow the traditional heuristic approach of
assigning A = I (representing a random walk process) and setting the state noise covariance
to the image element covariance P. The discrete time observation model at time step k is:
                 yk = Jk xk + n                                                             (9)
which is equivalent to (1) if J is constant. Kalman image reconstruction iteratively estimates
xk based on the previous image xk−1 and measurements yk .

                 x−
                  k = Ax̂k−1                           state estimation                   (10)
                 x̂k = x−                −
                        k + Kk (yk − Jk xk )           state correction                   (11)

where Kk is the Kalman gain, which is calculated from the error covariance estimate Ck as:

                 C−
                  k = AĈk−1 A + P
                              T
                                                       error covariance estimation        (12)
                                        −1
                 Kk = C−  T     − T
                       k Jk Jk Ck Jk + V               Kalman gain                        (13)

                 Ĉk = (I − Kk Jk )C−
                                    k                  error covariance correction.       (14)

Iterative calculation of K is computationally expensive. If J is constant, K will eventually
stabilize, and may be precomputed (Kim et al 2006) in order to dramatically speed up the
calculation. We do not take this approach here.
S6                                                                                            A Adler et al

2.4. Temporal one-step solver
Instead of calculating an image based on the sequence of past frames, we propose a temporal
image reconstruction algorithm which uses a set of data frames nearby in time. The data frame
sequence is treated as a single inverse problem, with a regularization prior to account for both
spatial and temporal correlations between image elements. Given a vertically concatenated
sequence of measurements frames ỹt = [yt−d ; . . . ; yt ; . . . ; yt+d ] and the corresponding
concatenated images x̃t = [xt−d ; . . . ; xt ; . . . ; xt+d ], the direct temporal forward model (1)
is rewritten as                                                 
                                                                                  
                    yt−d            J            ···         0        xt−d        nt−d
                  .                                                         . 
                  ..  
                                          ..                      ..          .. 
                                         .                   .                
                          ..                                                    
                  yt  =  .                     J          .. 
                                                             .
                                                                    xt   +    nt                (15)
                  .                                           .   . 
                                                                               
                  .                                ..          ..   ..         
                  .                                   .      
                    yt+d            0            ...         J        xt+d        nt+d
and also as
                ỹt = J̃x̃t + ñt                                                                     (16)
where ñt = [nt−d ; . . . ; nt ; . . . ; nt+d ]. We assume J to be constant, although this formulation
could be modified to account for a time varying J. Based on this approximation J̃ = I ⊗ J,
where the identity matrix I has size 2d + 1, and ⊗ is the Kronecker product.
     The correlation of corresponding elements between adjacent frames (delay δ = 1) can
be represented by an inter-frame correlation γ which has value between 0 (independent)
and 1 (fully dependent). As frames become separated in time, the inter-frame correlation
decreases; for an inter-frame separation δ, the inter-frame correlation is γ δ . γ could also
possibly be negative if subsequent frames have inverse correlation, although this scenario
is physiologically unrealistic. Frames with large inter-frame delay, |δ| > d, are considered
independent. Image reconstruction is then defined in terms of minimizing the augmented
expression:
                 
                                                                       2             
                  yt−d              J            ···          0       xt−d             xt−d 2
                                                                                          
                  ..                   ..                        ..              . 
                  .                       .                     .                .  
                                .                                                  . 
                                                               ..                          
                  yt  −  .
                                .               J
                                                                .
                                                                      xt   +λ 
                                                                                      2
                                                                                           xt      (17)
                  .                                             
                                                                     .                   
                  ..                               ..               .                .
                                                                                             .  
                                                         .         .               . 
                                                                                              
                  yt+d                                                xt+d             xt+d 
                                     0            ...          J       W̃                          R̃

and (5) becomes
               B̃ = R̃−1 J̃T (J̃R̃−1 J̃T + λ2 W̃−1 )−1                               (18)
where W̃ = I ⊗ W. W̃ is diagonal since measurement noise is uncorrelated between frames.
R̃ = Γ−1 ⊗ R where Γ is the temporal weight matrix of an image sequence x̃ and is defined
to have the form as
                                                              
                         1          γ      . . . γ 2d−1 γ 2d
                     γ
                                   1      . . . γ 2d−2 γ 2d−1 
                                                               
                                                              
               Γ= .
                     ..            .
                                    ..     ..
                                               .
                                                    .
                                                    ..     .. 
                                                           .
                                                               .                    (19)
                                                              
                     2d−1                                     
                    γ           γ 2d−2
                                           ...      1      γ 
                          γ 2d    γ 2d−1    ...     γ         1
Temporal image reconstruction in electrical impedance tomography                               S7

From (18) and (19),
                 B̃ = [Γ ⊗ (PJT )][Γ ⊗ (JPJT ) + λ2 (I ⊗ V)]−1 .                             (20)
Thus, (4) is rewritten as
                       
                  x̂t−d
                 . 
                 .. 
                       
                       
                 x̂t  = B̃ỹt .                                                            (21)
                 . 
                 . 
                 . 
                  x̂t+d
    Although this estimate is an augmented image sequence, we are typically only interested
in the current image x̂t . which is calculated from x̂t = B̃d ỹt where B̃d is the rows
nM d + 1 . . . nM (d + 1) of B̃.

2.5. Noise figure
In order to compare the different image reconstruction algorithms, it is important to
choose corresponding values of the hyperparameter for each algorithm. For a review of
hyperparameter selection methods for EIT, refer to Graham and Adler (2006). For our
application, we wish to compare the resolution and noise performance across algorithms;
however, since the regularization hyperparameter implicitly controls the compromise between
resolution and noise performance, we choose to control for noise performance across
algorithms, and then compare the resolution. Image reconstruction noise performance may
be measured with the noise figure (NF) parameter of Adler and Guardo (1996). Here we
generalize the NF calculation to apply to any difference EIT formulation, not simply one-step
Gauss–Newton-type algorithms.
     An EIT difference measurement vector is y = y0 + ny , where y0 is the deterministic
underlying signal, and ny is stochastic, zero mean, measurement noise. Typically, components
of ny are independent, but this formulation does not make this assumption. For difference
EIT, [y]i = [v2 ]i − [v1 ]i , and components of ny are often assumed to be equal, but this
may potentially vary if the gain varies between channels. For normalized difference EIT,
[y]i = ([v2 ]i − [v1 ]i )/[v1 ]i , and components of ny are scaled by diag(v1 )−1 . Both y0 and ny
may be complex valued.
     The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the difference measurement is defined as:
                        E[|y|]
                 SNRy = √                                                                    (22)
                         var(y)
                                    
where we approximate E[|y|] = n1M      |y0 | and calculate var(y) = n1M traceΣn where Σn is the
measurement noise covariance. nM is the number of measured values in the EIT data frame;
we divide by nM rather than nM − 1 to calculate the variance, since the noise is known to be
zero mean.
     This covariance may be modelled by a noise basis, Ny such that Ny NTy = Σn . For
difference EIT with independent noise on each channel, this is a diagonal matrix with [ny ]i,i
equal to the noise amplitude on channel i. Using this noise basis, var(y) = n1M Ny 2F , where
·2F is the sum of each matrix element squared (Frobenius norm squared).
     A general EIT reconstruction algorithm, EIT, reconstructs an image estimate, x̂ from
measurements as x̂ = EIT(y). This notation is also extended to reconstruct a matrix of column
S8                                                                                    A Adler et al

concatenated images independently from a matrix of measurements. The signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) of the difference image is:
                           E[|x|]
                SNRx = √                                                                (23)
                            var(x)
                                  
where we approximate E[|x|] = A|x0 | where x0 = EIT(y0 ) and A is a diagonal matrix of the
volume (or area in 2D) of each reconstructed image element. We calculate var(x) = traceA2 Σx
where Σx is the image noise covariance. For difference EIT, image reconstruction is linear
for small y, Using noise basis, Nx , we calculate Σx = Nx NTx where Nx = EIT(Ny ) for small
Ny , and var(x) = ANx 2F .
     The NF is the ratio of output to input SNR, where the input signal y0 is chosen to be a
small change in a central inner circular disc covering 10% of the medium diameter, and Nn is
scaled to be within the linear range of the algorithm.
                                               
                      SNRx          A|EIT(y0 )|      nM Ny 2F
                NF =          =                                 .                      (24)
                      SNRz              |y0 |      AEIT(Ny )2F
     While the SNR is normally defined in terms of the signal power, here we define it in
terms of absolute amplitude. This is necessary because it is the signal amplitude, and not the
power, that is spread across image elements with changes in hyperparameter; our experiments
with the signal power definition do not show stable or useful results. Finally, in distinction to
the definition in Adler and Guardo (1996), we calculate the absolute amplitude of the signal,
allowing this definition to be appropriate to EIT systems which measure complex signals.

3. Results

Numerical simulations were conducted using a planar 2D FEM model with 5184 elements
using the EIDORS software (Adler and Lionheart 2006). A unit radius circular medium with
16 electrodes using adjacent stimulation and measurement pattern is simulated, in which a
non-conductive spherical object with 0.05 unit radius rotates clockwise along a trajectory
that has a radius of 2/3 unit, moving at a speed of one rotation per 40 frames. The noise
performance of the algorithms was tested by adding pseudo random, zero mean Gaussian
noise. All reconstructed images in figures 1 and 2 used the same random seed; tests with
different seed values did not vary significantly. Images were reconstructed on a 576 element
mesh, which differs from the simulation model to avoid the inverse crime.
     Reconstructed images were calculated for four image algorithms and are shown in
corresponding columns in figures 1 and 2: (1) Gauss–Newton, (2) GN with weighted data, (3)
temporal solver and (4) Kalman filter. In each image, the positions of the target  at all data
frames used in the algorithms are shown. In all cases, the target was at (x, y) = − 23 , 0 in the
image shown. We explored the behaviour of these algorithms as a function of regularization
hyperparameter for both noise free and noisy data. In order to choose a hyperparameter to
allow comparison across algorithms, we select its value for each algorithm in order to give a
fixed NF value (section 2.5). Figure 2 shows reconstructed images for a low hyperparameter
value (giving NF = 2.0), while figure 1 shows images for a higher value (giving NF = 0.1).
Noise levels were chosen heuristically in order to illustrate the algorithm noise performance.

4. Discussion

Traditionally, EIT reconstruction algorithms assume each data frame to be independent.
However, since EIT is able to make measurements at high frame rates, we know a priori that
Temporal image reconstruction in electrical impedance tomography                                               S9




                                                                                                               1




                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                1




                 Figure 1. Reconstructed images of a target at (− 32 , 0) for high hyperparameter (parameters
                 NF = 0.1, γ = 0.8 and d = 3). Top row: no noise; bottom row: SNR = 0.25. Each column
                 uses a different reconstruction algorithm: A, Gauss–Newton, B, Gauss–Newton with weighted
                 data, C, temporal solver, D, Kalman filter. The black circles in the images indicate the position
                 of the simulated target in each data frame used for the image reconstruction. The colourbar (with
                 normalized units) is shown at right.




image frames are correlated. This paper addresses reconstruction of EIT data for temporal
reconstructions, in which we use temporal correlations to improve reconstructed image SNR. A
new temporal reconstruction algorithm is introduced, which directly formulates the temporal
inverse in terms of a single regularized expression. We compare four different algorithms: one-
step GN (with no temporal behaviour), GN with weighted data, Kalman filter reconstruction
and the proposed temporal reconstruction.
     Results show that the GN algorithm is able to accurately reconstruct the position and
shape of the target, but shows poorer noise performance than the other algorithms. As the
hyperparameter increases (figure 1), GN images tend to image targets closer toward the centre
of the body. This effect is well understood for EIT (e.g. Adler and Guardo (1996)), and
is probably a consequence of the prior weighting of central image elements. The GN with
averaged data blurs the reconstructed image across all the averaged data frames, but is able
to show improved noise performance, as is expected from ensemble averaging. Thus, GN
algorithms are recommended when noise levels are low, and GN with weighted data is a good
solution when the conductivity is changing slowly with respect to the frame rate.
     At low hyperparameter, the Kalman filter tends to reconstruct images with the target
‘pushed’ outward toward the boundary, and create image artefacts and image noise on the
boundary. We hypothesize that this effect is due to the iterative calculation of the error
covariance term (in (12)), which results in a C− which tends toward the identity matrix.
S10                                                                                               A Adler et al




                                                                                                             1




                                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                 1




               Figure 2. Reconstructed images of a target at (− 23 , 0) for low hyperparameter (chosen for
               NF = 2.0, γ = 0.8 and d = 3). Top row: no noise; bottom row: SNR = 4.0. Each column
               uses a different reconstruction algorithm: A, Gauss–Newton, B, Gauss–Newton with weighted
               data, C, temporal solver, D, Kalman filter. The black circles in the images indicate the position
               of the simulated target in each data frame used for the image reconstruction. The colourbar (with
               normalized units) is shown at right.



In the Kalman formulation, this term takes the place of R in the GN inverse, making the
Kalman filter images resemble GN images with zero-order Tikhonov regularization. For
larger hyperparameter values (figure 1), Kalman filter images tend to show a ‘trail’ as a larger
weighting is given to previous frame data in the current image calculation.
     At high hyperparameter values, the temporal reconstruction shows improved resolution
(illustrated as figure 1). While at low hyperparameter, it gives similar images to that of GN
(illustrated as figure 2). This behaviour may be understood, since at low hyperparameter
(λ ≈ 0), (20) approximates
               B̃ ≈ [Γ ⊗ (PJT )][Γ ⊗ (JPJT )]−1 = I ⊗ [PJT (JPJT )−1 ]                                    (25)
which will reconstruct each data frame independently. On the other hand, at high
hyperparameter, the reconstructed image will weigh data frames together, as per GN with
weighted data,
               B̃ ≈ [Γ ⊗ (PJT )][λ2 (I ⊗ V)]−1 = Γ ⊗ [PJT (λ2 V)−1 ].                                     (26)
In this paper, the temporal weight γ is chosen heuristically; however, objective selection of γ
is possible; its value could be estimated from the covariance of data frames measured.
     In summary, this paper proposes a temporal EIT reconstruction algorithm. For
low noise solutions (low hyperparameter) its behaviour approximates that of Gauss–
Newton reconstruction, while for high noise level and high frame rates cases where large
Temporal image reconstruction in electrical impedance tomography                                            S11

hyperparameters are adopted, it is advantageous by reconstructing higher resolution images.
It improves over Kalman filter based algorithms by allowing an explicit control over the
regularization prior and the weighting of measured data. We recommend the temporal
algorithm for cases in which the data noise is high and the underlying conductivity changes
are rapid with respect to the frame rate.

Acknowledgment

This work was supported by a grant from NSERC Canada.

References

Adler A and Guardo R 1996 Electrical impedance tomography: regularized imaging and contrast detection IEEE
     Trans. Med. Imaging 15 170–9
Adler A and Lionheart W R B 2006 Uses and abuses of EIDORS: an extensible software base for EIT Physiol.
     Meas. 27 S25–42
Cheney M, Isaacson D, Newell J C, Simske S and Goble J C 1990 NOSER: an algorithm for solving the inverse
     conductivity problem Int. J. Imaging Syst. Technol. 2 66–75
Eichenwald E C and Stark A R 1999 High frequency ventilation: current status Pediatr. Rev. 20 127–33
Graham B M and Adler A 2006 Objective selection of hyperparameter for EIT Physiol. Meas. 27 S65–79
Kim B S, Kim K Y, Kao T-J, Newell J C, Isaacson D and Saulnier G J 2006 Dynamic electrical impedance imaging
     of a chest phantom using the Kalman filter Physiol. Meas. 27 S81–91
Kim K Y, Kim B S, Kim M C and Kim S 2004 Dynamic inverse obstacle problems with electrical impedance
     tomography Math. Comput. Simul. 66 399–408
Kohler B-U, Hennig C and Orglmeister R 2002 The principles of software QRS detection IEEE Eng. Med. Biol.
     Mag. 21 42–57
Trigo F C, Gonzalez-Lima R and Amato M B P A 2004 Electrical impedance tomography using the extended Kalman
     filter IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 51 72–81
Vauhkonen M, Karjalainen P A and Kaipio J P 1998a A Kalman filter approach to track fast impedance changes in
     electrical impedance tomography IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 45 486–93
Vauhkonen M, Vadàsz D, Karjalainen P A, Somersalo E and Kaipio J P 1998b Tikhonov regularization and prior
     information in electrical impedance tomography IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 17 285–93
Wilkinson A J, Randall E W, Cilliers J J, Durrett D R, Naidoo T and Long T 2005 A 1000-measurement frames/second
     ERT data capture system with real-time visualization IEEE Sensors J. 5 300–7
Wolf G K and Arnold J H 2005 Noninvasive assessment of lung volume: respiratory inductance plethysmography
     and electrical impedance tomography Crit. Care Med. 33 S163–9
