Physiological
Measurement




                                                                                                  You may also like
                                                                                                     - Choice of reconstructed tissue properties
GREIT: a unified approach to 2D linear EIT                                                             affects interpretation of lung EIT images
                                                                                                       Bartomiej Grychtol and Andy Adler
reconstruction of lung images                                                                        - Influence of reconstruction settings in
                                                                                                       electrical impedance tomography on
                                                                                                       figures of merit and physiological
To cite this article: Andy Adler et al 2009 Physiol. Meas. 30 S35                                      parameters
                                                                                                       F Thürk, M Elenkov, A D Waldmann et al.

                                                                                                     - Uniform background assumption produces
                                                                                                       misleading lung EIT images
                                                                                                       Bartomiej Grychtol and Andy Adler
View the article online for updates and enhancements.




                             This content was downloaded from IP address 150.131.100.171 on 20/09/2026 at 23:27
IOP PUBLISHING                                                                             PHYSIOLOGICAL MEASUREMENT
Physiol. Meas. 30 (2009) S35–S55                                                   doi:10.1088/0967-3334/30/6/S03




GREIT: a unified approach to 2D linear EIT
reconstruction of lung images
                  Andy Adler1, John H Arnold1, Richard Bayford3, Andrea Borsic4,
                  Brian Brown5, Paul Dixon6, Theo J C Faes7, Inéz Frerichs8,
                  Hervé Gagnon9, Yvo Gärber10, Bartłomiej Grychtol11, Günter Hahn12,
                  William R B Lionheart13, Anjum Malik14, Robert P Patterson15,
                  Janet Stocks16, Andrew Tizzard3, Norbert Weiler8 and
                  Gerhard K Wolf2
                  1 Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada
                  2 Division of Critical Care Medicine, Department of Anesthesia, Children’s Hospital Boston,

                  Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
                  3 Department of Natural Sciences, Middlesex University, London, UK
                  4 School of Engineering, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, USA
                  5 Medical Physics, University of Sheffield, UK
                  6 Cardinal Health Care, London, Sheffield, UK
                  7 Department of Physics and Medical Technology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam,

                  The Netherlands
                  8 Department of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine, University of

                  Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany
                  9 Département de génie électrique, École Polytechnique de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada
                  10 Dräger Medical, Lübeck, Germany
                  11 University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, UK
                  12 Department of Anaesthesiological Research, University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany
                  13 School of Mathematics, University of Manchester, UK
                  14 Maltron International, Rayleigh, UK
                  15 Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA
                  16 Institute of Child Health, University College London, UK



                  Received 3 December 2008, accepted for Publication 10 March 2009
                  Published 2 June 2009
                  Online at stacks.iop.org/PM/30/S35

                  Abstract
                  Electrical impedance tomography (EIT) is an attractive method for clinically
                  monitoring patients during mechanical ventilation, because it can provide
                  a non-invasive continuous image of pulmonary impedance which indicates
                  the distribution of ventilation. However, most clinical and physiological
                  research in lung EIT is done using older and proprietary algorithms; this is an
                  obstacle to interpretation of EIT images because the reconstructed images
                  are not well characterized. To address this issue, we develop a consensus
                  linear reconstruction algorithm for lung EIT, called GREIT (Graz consensus
                  Reconstruction algorithm for EIT). This paper describes the unified approach
                  to linear image reconstruction developed for GREIT. The framework for the
                  linear reconstruction algorithm consists of (1) detailed finite element models of
                  a representative adult and neonatal thorax, (2) consensus on the performance
                  figures of merit for EIT image reconstruction and (3) a systematic approach
0967-3334/09/060035+21$30.00   © 2009 Institute of Physics and Engineering in Medicine   Printed in the UK       S35
S36                                                                                  A Adler et al

               to optimize a linear reconstruction matrix to desired performance measures.
               Consensus figures of merit, in order of importance, are (a) uniform amplitude
               response, (b) small and uniform position error, (c) small ringing artefacts, (d)
               uniform resolution, (e) limited shape deformation and (f) high resolution. Such
               figures of merit must be attained while maintaining small noise amplification
               and small sensitivity to electrode and boundary movement. This approach
               represents the consensus of a large and representative group of experts in
               EIT algorithm design and clinical applications for pulmonary monitoring.
               All software and data to implement and test the algorithm have been made
               available under an open source license which allows free research and
               commercial use.


               Keywords:      electrical impedance tomography, image reconstruction, lung
               physiology
               (Some figures in this article are in colour only in the electronic version)




1. Introduction

Electrical impedance tomography (EIT) measures conductivity changes within a body, by
measuring the voltages at electrodes on the body surface caused when a number of different
currents are passed through the body. One of the most promising applications of EIT is for a
description of physiologic events in the thorax, since the thorax contains several organs which
undergo large changes in conductivity during normal functioning. Indeed, lung function
measurement was among the first physiological applications of this technology (Barber and
Brown 1984). EIT is unique in that it is able to non-invasively measure chest impedance to
give a continuous image of the distribution of ventilation. Based on these advantages, there
is significant interest in EIT to monitor patients with respiratory compromise (Frerichs et al
2003, Victorino et al 2004, Wolf et al 2007).
     One limitation is that most clinical and physiological research on lung EIT is being done
using proprietary variants of older image reconstruction algorithms, such as the back-projection
algorithm as implemented in the Sheffield (Brown and Seagar 1987) or Göttingen (Hahn et al
2002) EIT systems. The algorithms, although very successful for the time, do not incorporate
advances that have been made over the last 20 years. The reconstructed images show spatial
non-uniformity in image amplitude, position and resolution, which make interpretation of
regional ventilation difficult and error prone. For example, because of position errors, changes
near the skin can appear as contrasts in the lung regions. Many other approaches to the
reconstruction of EIT images have been proposed, incorporating many advances (Lionheart
2004); however, such approaches have not been widely used clinically and experimentally
because there was a lack of an agreement on which approaches were best (and how they could
be combined).
     To address this issue, we develop a consensus linear reconstruction algorithm for lung
EIT, called GREIT (Graz consensus Reconstruction algorithm for EIT), since early discussions
took place at the 2007 ICEBI conference in Graz, Austria. Our aim is to develop a standard
which has broad agreement from experts in the mathematical, engineering, physiological and
clinical EIT communities. Such an approach is feasible because there is general consensus
GREIT: linear EIT image reconstruction                                                        S37

amongst experts in lung EIT applications on the ‘ingredients’ that should be part of a robust and
high-performance linear algorithm for 2D EIT of the lungs. This paper describes the unified
approach to linear image reconstruction developed for GREIT, and the tools and evaluation
methodology for clinical and experimental testing of the algorithm.
     The current work is limited to the reconstruction algorithm. At this stage, we do not
propose calibration tests, data formats or phantoms, standards for image interpretation or EIT-
based lung parameters; we do not feel there is sufficient experience yet to reach consensus in
these areas. It is important to clarify that there is no financial goal to the development of this
algorithm. All developed algorithms, software models and simulation and experimental test
data used in this algorithm have been made available under an open source license as part of
the open source EIDORS distribution (Adler and Lionheart 2006); this license permits royalty
free use in both research and commercial applications. Additionally, due to space constraints
in this paper, only a limited set of results could be included. The complete algorithms, results
and source data are available on the Internet at eidors.org/GREIT.
     The following specifications have been defined for GREIT.

  • Single-ring electrode configurations with Sheffield-type EIT systems, using adjacent
    current injection and measurement.
  • Linear (i.e. real-time) reconstruction of a 2D conductivity change image, based on a 3D
    forward model.
  • Quantitative difference reconstructions for which units can be assigned to EIT images.
  • Reconstruction onto a 32 × 32 pixel array for a single ring of 16, 12 and 8 electrodes, for
    the shapes: (a) neonatal chest, (b) male and female adult chest and (c) cylindrical tank.
     These specifications represent, in our opinion, the limits to areas sufficiently well
understood in the EIT community to reach consensus. We do not suggest that such limits are
ideal; in fact, we actively encourage work to overcome them, such as the single-ring placement
of electrodes and the consequent lack of 3D image information.


2. Methods: performance figures of merit

In this section, we elaborate a set of criteria which characterize the performance of an ideal
reconstruction algorithm. Clearly, there is an inherent trade-off between the criteria, such that
it is not possible to simultaneously optimize all measures. Instead, we proceed as follows.
First, we establish the desired performance measures of an ideal algorithm; subsequently, we
describe a unified methodology to calculate a reconstruction matrix which is an optimized
compromise of criteria weighted by the consensus importance of each.
      We consider an EIT system using the following notation. Using nE electrodes, nE
current stimulation patterns are sequentially applied and nV differential voltage measurements
are made in parallel for each stimulation. For an adjacent drive EIT system, voltages are
typically not measured at driven electrodes, and nV = nE − 3. Each data frame measures
a vector, v ∈ RnM , of nM = nE nV data points (some of which are redundant if the medium
is not changing). Difference EIT calculates difference data y, ([y]i = [v]i − [vr ]i ), or
the normalized difference data [y]i = ([v]i − [vr ]i )/[vr ]i ), where vr is a reference set of
measurements corresponding to the background conductivity distribution, σ r . To improve its
precision, vr is typically averaged over many data frames; such ensemble averaging reduces
random noise, and we assume that vr is noise free.
      An outline of the calculation of performance figures of merit is given in figure 1. Given
a vector of EIT difference or normalized difference data, y (length nE nV ), we calculate a
S38                                                                                                      A Adler et al




                Figure 1. Performance figures of merit for evaluation of GREIT images. Based on a reconstructed
                image (x̂, left), an image (x̂q , centre) is constructed of all image pixels which exceed one-fourth of
                the maximum amplitude. From these images, figures of merit at right are calculated as described.




reconstructed EIT image x̂ = Ry based on an EIT linear reconstruction algorithm represented
as a matrix R. x̂ is a column vector representing the 32 × 32 pixel grid of the images.
     We define figures of merit based on small ‘point’ conductivity changes, where ‘small’
indicates a diameter of less than 5% of the medium diameter and thus much smaller than the
inherent resolution of EIT with 16 electrodes. To evaluate this image, we first calculate a
one-fourth amplitude set, x̂q , which contains all image pixels [x̂]i greater than one-fourth of
the maximum amplitude:
                         
                           1      if [x̂]i ⩾ 14 max(x̂)
               [x̂q ]i =                                                                     (1)
                           0      otherwise.
For targets with a conductivity decrease, the definition of the one-fourth amplitude set is
inverted. A threshold of one-fourth represents a compromise which detects most of the
visually significant effects; however, the exact value of the threshold has little effect on
the final algorithm parameters. The centre of gravity (CoG) of x̂ and x̂q are calculated, and
the distance from the CoG to the medium centre is then calculated, as rt and rq , respectively.
     Based on images of point targets, we define the following figures of merit:
  • Amplitude response (AR) measures the ratio of image pixel amplitudes in the target to
    that in the reconstructed image. For a spherical target of volume Vt in the electrode plane
    with conductivity σt in a body of homogeneous reference conductivity σr
                           
                               [x̂]k
                    AR = k σ ,                                                              (2)
                            Vt σr
      where σ = σt − σr . AR allows units to be assigned to the reconstructed conductivities.
      For this, we require that reconstruction matrices, R, be scaled such that AR = 1 for a
      small spherical target with σ/σr ≈ 1 in the centre of the body. With this normalization,
      reconstructed EIT images have units as follows.

 (i) Normalized difference EIT. In this case, measurements y are unitless and the EIT image
     will be in units of fractional conductivity change, σ/σr .
GREIT: linear EIT image reconstruction                                                        S39

(ii) Difference EIT. In this case, measurements y must be in units of transfer conductance
     (−1 ), and the EIT image will be in units of conductivity change (in −1 m) scaled by
     the ratio or the measurement geometry to the FEM geometry.
     Desired behaviour. AR should be constant for any target position. We consider constant
     AR to be the most important figure of merit, since, without constant amplitude response,
     the same volume of air in different parts of the lung will contribute differently to the
     image, introducing serious difficulties in image interpretation.
  • Position error (PE) measures the extent to which reconstructed images faithfully represent
    the position of the image target. Based on the target position, rt , and the CoG of x̂q , rq ,
    we define
                    PE = rt − rq ,                                                            (3)
    where positive values of PE indicate reconstructed images ‘pushed’ to the medium centre.
    This measure is similar to that of Adler and Guardo (1996).

    Desired behaviour. PE should be small and show small variability for targets at different
    radial positions. We consider small and constant PE to be the second most important figure
    of merit. If PE is variable, interpretation of a distribution of air in the lungs becomes
    unreliable. Sheffield backprojection has large PE near the electrodes, and this has resulted
    in cases where changes at the electrodes are misinterpreted as being inside the body.
  • Resolution (RES) measures the size of reconstructed targets as a fraction of the medium;
    this is equivalent to a measure of the point spread function (PSF) size:
                             
                               Aq
                    RES =         ,                                                          (4)
                               A0
                  
    where Aq = k [x̂q ]k and the number of pixels in x̂q and A0 is the area (in pixels) of the
    entire reconstructed medium. The square root is used so that RES measures radius ratios
    rather than area ratios. This measure is modelled on the one proposed by Wheeler et al
    (2002).

    Desired behaviour. RES should be uniform and small, in order to more accurately
    represent the shape of the target conductivity distribution. We consider uniformity of
    RES to be the fourth most important figure of merit, but the small size of RES to be less
    important (sixth). A non-uniform RES can result in an incorrect reconstructed position
    of a larger target. Low RES serves primarily to distinguish nearby targets. Since EIT is
    understood to be a low resolution medium, this application is less important.
  • Shape deformation (SD). Reconstruction algorithms typically create circular images for
    targets in the centre, but often display strangely shaped artefacts for targets near the
    medium boundary. The Sheffield backprojection algorithm tends to show ‘streak’ artefacts
    in this case. SD measures the fraction of the reconstructed one-fourth amplitude set which
    does not fit within a circle of an equal area,
                                      
                    SD =       [x̂q ]k     [x̂q ]k ,                                       (5)
                              k∈C       k
     where C is a circle centred at the CoG of x̂q with an area equivalent to Aq . This figure is
     similar to that of Oh et al (2007).
     Desired behaviour. SD should be low and uniform. Large SD may result in incorrect
     interpretation of images, although this effect is less important than other artefacts. We
     consider SD to be the fifth most important figure of merit.
S40                                                                                                A Adler et al




                Figure 2. Schematic representation of the NF parameter. NF represents the amplification of noise
                through the reconstruction process as the ratio of SNRx to SNRy .



  • Ringing (RNG) measures whether reconstructed images show areas of opposite sign
    surrounding the main reconstructed target area. Figure 1 shows an arc of ringing around
    the image centre. Ringing is typical of linear filters; for second-order systems the effect
    may also be called ‘overshoot’. RNG measures the ratio of image amplitude of the
    opposite sign outside circle C to image amplitude within C:
                            ⎛                 ⎞
                                                   
                   RNG = ⎝              [x̂]k ⎠         [x̂]k .                             (6)
                                  k∈C&[x̂]k <0             k∈C


    Desired behaviour. RNG should be low and uniform. Overshoot may easily result in
    incorrect interpretation. For example, the negative ringing between non-conductive lungs
    will produce a conductive pattern which may be misinterpreted as a heart. We consider
    RNG to be the third most important figure of merit.
  • Noise amplification (NF) measures the extent to which random measurement noise is
    amplified in the reconstructed images. Noise amplification is measured by the noise
    figure (NF) as illustrated in figure 2, based on the definition by Adler and Guardo (1996).
    The NF is the ratio of the output to the input signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) for a filter.
    We define SNR = mean|signal|
                           std noise
                                     in terms of image amplitude, rather than in terms of image
    energy, since linear image reconstruction tends to conserve amplitude rather than energy.
    Thus
                             E[mean |x̂t |]/E[std x̂n ]
                     NF =                               .                                    (7)
                             E[mean |yt |]/E[std yn ]
    For regularized algorithms, the value of NF is normally set by selection of the value of
    a hyperparameter. For GREIT, the value of NF is set by the weighting associated with
    the training noise. There is an inherent trade-off between good noise performance and
    fidelity to the other figures of merit.

      Desired behaviour. NF should be low and, ideally, should be tuned to the noise level
      present in the EIT hardware used. Several studies have looked into strategies to select
      appropriate noise performance (e.g. Graham and Adler (2006)). At this time, we do not
      have consensus on the best way to choose NF. Instead, we note that noise performance of
      Sheffield backprojection (NF = 0.5 in the medium centre) has generally been considered
      to be satisfactory. Therefore, as an interim measure, we recommend NF = 0.5 for GREIT
      algorithms.
GREIT: linear EIT image reconstruction                                                                       S41

3. Methods: reconstruction algorithm framework

This section describes the GREIT framework to calculate a linear image reconstruction matrix
which is optimized to a set of performance requirements. This approach is based on experience
with a large number of linear regularized EIT reconstruction approaches (such as Adler
and Guardo (1996), Adler and Lionheart (2006), Barber and Brown (1988), Cheney et al
(1990), Cohen-Bacrie et al (1997), Polydorides and Lionheart (2002), Soleimani et al (2006),
Vauhkonen et al (1998)). The key difference is that this framework is based on a set of
performance requirements, whereas previous reconstruction algorithms are based directly
on the underlying mathematical models and do not express the performance requirements
explicitly. The value of this approach is that it allows these performance requirements
(established in our case via consensus) to be directly encoded into the reconstruction algorithm.
     The body under investigation is modelled using a finite element model (FEM) which
discretizes the conductivity onto nN piecewise smooth elements, represented by a vector
σ ∈ RnN (to clarify use of symbols, σ represents a vector conductivity distribution, while σ is
the standard deviation). Difference EIT calculates a vector of conductivity change, x = σ − σ r
between the present, σ , and the reference, σ r , conductivity distributions. x may also represent
a parameter log σσr , which matches the conductivity change in the linear approximation.
     Image reconstruction in EIT is a nonlinear problem; however, linearized approximations
have proved to be very useful. This is largely because the measurement noise and geometric
uncertainty present in clinical and experimental EIT data are sufficiently large to prevent
stable results with iterative algorithms. Linear algorithms also have the benefit of producing
images in which the effects of data artefacts can be more readily identified. Finally, linear
reconstruction can be implemented as a fast matrix multiplication. We represent linear EIT
image reconstruction as a matrix, R ∈ RnN ×nM which maps measurements y to a reconstructed
image x̂:
                  x̂ = Ry.                                                                                   (8)

3.1. Sheffield backprojection
The backprojection algorithm was developed by Barber and Brown (1984) for the original
Sheffield EIT system, and has seen numerous variants and improvements (Barber 1989).
While the original technique was based on an analogy to the backprojection algorithm for
CT, this model was clearly inadequate, because electric current propagates diffusely and thus
differently to x-ray photons. Therefore, improvements were developed to the backprojection
algorithm (e.g. Barber and Brown 1988). Such strategies can be shown to regularize the
reconstructed images. A good mathematical characterization is given by Santosa and Vogelius
(1990).
     While many variants of Sheffield backprojection exist, clinical and experimental EIT has
largely used only the one which was distributed in the Sheffield Mark I EIT system (Brown
and Seagar 1987). The Göttingen Goe MF II EIT system (Hahn et al 2002) has also been
widely used for such clinical and experimental work, and uses a very similar reconstruction
algorithm.
     Unfortunately, it appears that the exact formulation of this algorithm has been lost. To
regenerate it, we proceeded as follows. Since image reconstruction is linear, there exists
a mapping which can explain the transformation of measurements into images. From a
Sheffield Mark I device, we obtained a large set of measurements, yk , and the associated
reconstructed images, x̂k , and formed matrices Y = [y1 , . . . , yk , . . .] and X = [x̂1 , . . . , x̂k , . . .]
by concatenation. The Sheffield backprojection matrix was calculated as the least-squared fit
S42                                                                                   A Adler et al

to YRSBP = X. In order to permit testing of EIT data against this algorithm, it has been made
available online eidors.org/data contrib/db backproj matrix under the following license: ‘this
matrix is copyright DC Barber and BH Brown at University of Sheffield. It may be used
free of charge for research and non-commercial purposes. Commercial applications require a
license from the University of Sheffield’.

3.2. One-step linear Gauss–Newton solvers
In this section, we elaborate the Gauss–Newton (GN) EIT reconstruction approaches, which
have been widely used in EIT since the late 1980s (Yorkey et al 1987, Cheney et al 1990). This
approach allows use of sophisticated regularized models of the EIT inverse problem, able to
represent this solution as a linear reconstruction matrix, which can then allow rapid, real-time
imaging. For small variations around the reference conductivity σ r , the relationship between
x and y can be linearized (giving the difference EIT forward model):
               y = Jx + n,                                                                     (9)
where J ∈ RnM ×nN is the Jacobian or sensitivity matrix and n ∈ RnM is the measurement
noise, which is assumed to be uncorrelated white Gaussian. J is calculated from the FEM
              ∂[y]i 
as [J]ij = ∂[x]   j σr
                       , and depends on the FEM, the current injection patterns, the reference
conductivity and the electrode models. This system is underdetermined since nN > nM .
Regularization techniques are required in order to calculate a conductivity change estimate,
x̂, which is faithful both to the measurements, y, and to a priori constraints on a ‘reasonable’
image.
     The GN inverse problem seeks to calculate a solution, x̂, to the EIT inverse problem
in terms of a generalized Tikhonov regularization expressed as the minimum of a sum of
quadratic norms:
               y − Jx̂2 −1 + x − x◦ 2 −1 ,                                             (10)
                           n                x
        ◦
where x represents the expected value of element conductivity changes, which is zero for
difference EIT. Σn ∈ RnM ×nM is the covariance matrix of the measurement noise n. Since n
is uncorrelated, Σn is a diagonal matrix with [Σn ]i,i = σi2 , where σi2 is the noise variance at
measurement i. Σx ∈ RnN ×nN is the expected image covariance.
     It is worth noting that many other regularized approaches to EIT have been used,
such as the TSVD (truncated singular value decomposition; Bayford et al 2008) and SIRT
(simultaneous iterative reconstruction technique; Hahn et al 2006). All linear approaches are
structurally similar; however, the formulation in (10) explicitly exposes the selection of the
image reconstruction parameters.
     Typically, covariance matrices Σn and Σx are not calculated directly, but are modelled
heuristically from a priori considerations as V = σn2 Σn and P = σx2 Σx , where σn is the
average measurement noise amplitude and σx is the a priori amplitude of conductivity change.
V models the measurement accuracy. For uncorrelated noise, each diagonal element is
proportional to the signal-to-noise ratio. For difference EIT with identical channels, V = I.
The regularization matrix P may be understood to model the likelihood of image elements and
their interactions.
     By solving (10), a linearized, one-step inverse solution is obtained as
                                           −1
                           1          1             1
                x̂ = JT 2 V−1 J + 2 P−1         JT 2 V−1 y
                          σn         σx            σn
                 = (JT V−1 J + λ2 P−1 )−1 JT V−1 y,                                          (11)
GREIT: linear EIT image reconstruction                                                         S43

where parameter λ = σn /σx is often called the ‘regularization hyperparameter’ and controls
the trade-off between resolution and noise attenuation in the reconstructed image. The matrix,
R = (JT V−1 J+λ2 P−1 )−1 JT V−1 , is the linear, one-step inverse. In (11), the term in the inverse
is of size nN × nN . To save computational time, and improve inverse accuracy and stability,
matrix R may be rewritten using the data form or Wiener filter form as
                 R = PJT (JPJT + λ2 V)−1 .                                                    (12)
In (12), the size of the term in the inverse is reduced to nM × nM .
      If image elements are assumed to be independent with identical variance, P becomes an
identity matrix I and (11) uses zeroth-order Tikhonov regularization. For EIT, such solutions
tend to push reconstructed noise towards the boundary, since the measured data are much
more sensitive to boundary image elements. Instead, P may be scaled with the sensitivity
of each element, so that each diagonal element i, [P−1 ]i,i = [JT J]i,i . This is the NOSER
prior of Cheney et al (1990). Many other prior matrices have been proposed: to model image
smoothness as a penalty for non-smooth image regions, P may be set to the discrete Laplacian
filter (Vauhkonen et al 1998), a discrete high-pass Gaussian filter (Adler and Guardo 1996)
or based on variance uniformization constraints (Cohen-Bacrie et al 1997). In this paper,
we compare results from the GREIT approach with those of GN image reconstruction using
the NOSER prior. This algorithm is representative of a broad group of structurally similar
algorithms that have been widely implemented in EIT; it is considered to generally perform
well.

3.3. GREIT image reconstruction approach
In this section, we elaborate the GREIT procedure from which the reconstruction matrix, R,
is calculated. The procedure depends on the definition of a forward model, a noise model and
desired performance metrics.

3.3.1. Forward model A forward model allows calculation of EIT measurement data y(k)
from a conductivity change distribution x(k) . The model represents the details of the body
geometry, the electrode size and contact impedance, and the reference conductivity, σ r , around
which conductivity changes occur. In this paper, the forward problem is solved using a 3D
FEM using the complete electrode model (Cheng et al 1989). However, it is worth noting that
any forward model, physical or numerical, is suitable for this procedure.
     One other requirement for the forward problem model is an estimate of the amplitude of
conductivity changes x(k) encountered in the modelled EIT application. Based on the forward
model, conductivity changes, x, result in a measurement variance σy2 = var y = E[y2 ]. The
mean y is assumed to be zero, which implies that positive and negative conductivity changes
are equally likely. This assumption is reasonable for a general purpose EIT reconstruction
algorithm, although specific EIT applications may not match it exactly. For lung images, we
may calculate σy2 using either a simulation model of the amplitude of conductivity changes
due to breathing or from a sample of EIT measurements in representative applications.

3.3.2. Noise model A noise model allows calculation of representative noise (or undesired
signal) samples in EIT measurements. For GREIT, we consider two sources of noise:
electronic measurement noise and electrode movement artefacts. In general, for each source
of noise ns , we have noise samples y(k)
                                      ns and an estimate of the noise amplitude variance
σn2s = var yns = E[yns 2 ]. The mean noise is assumed to be zero in this formulation;
if necessary, a non-zero noise mean should be accounted for by pre-processing of EIT
S44                                                                                                     A Adler et al




                 Figure 3. Training data for GREIT. Two sets of training data are used, based on conductivity targets
                 and noise or artefact sources. For each type of data, a set of training inputs (EIT measurements) and
                 desired outputs (reconstructed images) are calculated. The rectangles represent a matrix in which
                 each column (k) represents a training sample. The circle represents the corresponding desired
                 image pattern.




measurements. Note that for normalized difference EIT, noise samples are normalized by
the reference measurements by [y]i = [n]i /[vr ]i .

Electronic measurement noise is typically modelled to be uniform and Gaussian in EIT image
reconstruction. This assumption is reasonable for a generic GREIT algorithm designed for
general EIT reconstruction. However, for a specific EIT system, measurement noise is a
function of the EIT hardware and patient connection. If different gain settings are used
for each channel, these settings will alter the noise. Calibrated measurements of EIT noise
show that it is non-Gaussian and varies between channels (Hahn et al 2008). We suggest
GREIT algorithms be tuned to the hardware implementation. This may be implemented
using a calibration protocol before the start of measurements or by integrating a model of the
hardware imperfections into the forward model (Hartinger et al 2007).

Electrode movement artefacts occur when the electrodes move, either with posture change
or with chest movements due to breathing. Several reports have demonstrated the significant
impact of such movements on EIT images (Adler et al 1996, Zhang and Patterson 2005,
Coulombe et al 2005). In order to reduce the contribution of such movement on EIT
reconstruction, Soleimani et al (2006) showed that it is possible to create an augmented
forward model based on both the conductivity change and electrode movement, which
resulted in reduced movement artefacts in the reconstructed images. In order to use this
capability in GREIT, we specify that a set of ‘noise’ measurements due to electrode movement
be incorporated. This is currently implemented from deformations of the FEM (Gómez-
Laberge and Adler 2008), but may be based on a calibration protocol in an implemented
system.


3.3.3. Desired performance metrics Based on the performance metrics defined in section 2,
we create a training set of ‘desired images’, x̃t . For training set member (k), each image, x̃(k)     t ,
corresponds to the position of a conductivity target, x(k)    t  , in the forward   model,  as illustrated
in figure 3. The desired image, x̃t , is located at the same centre as the conductivity target, xt .
However, x̃t is defined to be a circle with a circular area corresponding to the blurring inherent
in EIT, while xt is essentially a point target. It is this definition of a larger ‘desired image’ which
allows GREIT to achieve a more uniform resolution. Since most EIT reconstruction algorithms
achieve better resolution near the boundary than in the medium centre, this definition of x̃t
GREIT: linear EIT image reconstruction                                                                               S45




                 Figure 4. Illustration of the training data and weighting. Left: training target (x(k)     t ), centre:
                 reconstructed image (x̂(k) ), right: desired image (x̃(k)
                                                                        t ). The bottom row shows the image, while
                 the top row plots the amplitude across a row through the centre of the simulation target. x̃(k)     t is
                 larger than x(k)
                               t in order to establish a uniform resolution. The weighting w
                                                                                               (k) is illustrated on the

                 image of x̃(k)
                             t by two circles. Inside the inner circle and outside the outer circle, w
                                                                                                            (k) is larger,

                 illustrated by the small error bars on the upper graph. Between the circles, in the ‘transition zone’,
                 w(k) is smaller, illustrated by the larger error bars.




forces a trade-off of boundary resolution for a lower resolution that can be achieved uniformly
throughout the image. Note that it be would possible to set x̃(k)     (k)
                                                                t = xt ; however, this would be
equivalent to a standard GN solution without tuning the algorithm to the performance metrics.
We recommend, for a 16-electrode EIT system, that the diameter of x̃t be 20% of the medium
diameter.
      Corresponding to each ‘desired image’ is an image weighting w(k) which represents the
weight given to each pixel in x̃(k)
                                  t . The weighting allows ‘tuning’ of the relative importance
of the performance metrics, as illustrated in figure 4. For each desired image, x̃(k) t , there is
an inner circular zone centred at the target position where the amplitude is required to be
flat to meet the AR and PE performance metrics. There is another circular zone outside the
boundary of the specified contrast, where the desired image is zero, to meet the RNG and SD
performance metrics (illustrated as circles in figure 4 (bottom left)). In these zones, w(k) is
large in order to provide a substantial penalty for images outside the specifications. Between
the circles, we have a ‘transition zone’ in which the response gradually decreases from the
specified amplitude to zero. In the transition zone, w(k) is small to allow the reconstruction
algorithm flexibility to meet the other specifications.
      In addition to the conductivity targets, noise training samples, yn , are generated for data
noise and electrode movement. For noise samples, the ‘desired image’, x̃n , is clearly zero; we
wish for noise input to produce no output. For these images, the weighting, w(k) , is uniform
across the image area. The magnitude of w(k) controls NF and the overall noise performance
of GREIT. A large value of w(k) results in a large penalty for image noise and a low NF, and
vice versa.
      Based on the forward model, noise model and desired performance metrices, we are able
to formulate a set of training data and define the GREIT reconstruction matrix in terms of these
data. We can show that for a linear reconstruction, this approach is equivalent to a generalized
Tikhonov regularization (section 3.2) in which the prior distributions, Σx and Σn , correspond
to the selection strategy for the training data (section 3.4). The GREIT reconstruction matrix
R (later referred to as RGR ) which best fits the requirements may be expressed as minimization
S46                                                                                                                 A Adler et al

of an error  2 :
                            
                    2 =             x̃(k) − Ry(k) 2W(k)
                             k
                                                                                                            
                        =                     [x̃(k) ]2i [w(k) ]2i − 2[x̃(k) ]i [w(k) ]2i        Rij [y(k) ]j
                             k        i                                                      j
                                                                 2
                            + [w(k) ]2i             Rij [y(k) ]j        ,                                                  (13)
                                                j

where the sum k is over all training measurement and noise samples, and W(k) = (diag w(k) )2
is a diagonal matrix representing the weighting corresponding to each measurement. The
2-norm is used as it allows a linear expression for, and faster computation of, R; however,
other norms may result in improved performance.
     Based on (13), we develop an expression for R = arg min  2 , by setting the matrix
           ∂ 2
derivative ∂R ij
                 to zero:

                        1 ∂ 2                                                                
                    −          =   [x̃(k) ]i [w(k) ]2i [y(k) ]j −   [w(k) ]2i      Ril [y(k) ]l = 0
                        2 ∂Rij   k                                k             l
                                                                                                       
                               =   [x̃ ]i [w ]i [y ]j −
                                      (k)      (k) 2 (k)
                                                                    Ril        [y(k) ]l [w(k) ]2i [y(k) ]j
                                          k                                     l            k
                                                    
                                     = Aij −             Ril Bij l ,                                                       (14)
                                                     l

where
 (k)matrix       A ∈ RnN ×nM and       tensor    B ∈ RnN ×nM ×nM are defined as A =
  k [x̃ ]i [w ]i [y ]j and B =
             (k) 2 (k)                       (k)   (k) 2 (k)
                                         k [y ]l [w ]i [y ]j , respectively. Based on these
expressions, RGR solves
                       
                 Aij =   [RGR ]il Bij l.                                               (15)
                                 l

     If the weights, w, are the same for each training data set, then B does not depend on i and
(15) can be written in terms of matrices A and B as A = RGR B; the reconstruction matrix is
calculated and RGR = AB−1 . The results for this paper are calculated using this expression
for uniform w, since the best selection of weights has not been established.
     If w varies for each element, then RGR is solved using block diagonal matrix based on B:
⎡        ⎤ ⎡                                                      ⎤−1 ⎡      ⎤
  R11          B111 · · · B11M · · · 0               ··· 0              A11
⎢.       ⎥ ⎢.           . . ..        . . ..         . . ..       ⎥ ⎢.       ⎥
⎢..      ⎥ ⎢..             . .            . .           . .       ⎥ ⎢..      ⎥
⎢        ⎥ ⎢                                                      ⎥ ⎢        ⎥
⎢R ⎥ ⎢B                                                           ⎥   ⎢      ⎥
⎢ 1M ⎥ ⎢ 1M1 · · · B1MM · · · 0                      ··· 0        ⎥ ⎢A1M ⎥
⎢.       ⎥ ⎢.                                                     ⎥   ⎢      ⎥
⎢.       ⎥ = ⎢.         .. .  .       .. .  .        .. . .       ⎥ ⎢.  .    ⎥.             (16)
⎢.       ⎥ ⎢.              . .            . .           . .       ⎥ ⎢.       ⎥
⎢        ⎥ ⎢                                                      ⎥ ⎢        ⎥
⎢RN1 ⎥ ⎢0               ··· 0         · · · BN11 · · · BN1M ⎥ ⎢AN1 ⎥
⎢        ⎥ ⎢                                                      ⎥ ⎢        ⎥
⎢..      ⎥ ⎢..          . . ..        . . ..         . . ..       ⎥ ⎢..      ⎥
⎣.       ⎦ ⎣.              . .            . .           . .       ⎦ ⎣.       ⎦
  RNM          0        ··· 0         · · · BNM1 · · · BNMM             ANM
    The calculation of the GREIT reconstruction matrix may be shown to be equivalent to
a scaled generalized Tikhonov solution of the form of section 3.2. In order to illustrate this
equivalence, consider a GREIT reconstruction algorithm formulated with uniform weighting
W for each sample, k. A training set of size nT training conductivity targets, y(k)
                                                                                t , are drawn
GREIT: linear EIT image reconstruction                                                                S47

from a distribution with covariance Σx . For this example, we consider nN samples of only the
electronic measurement noise, y(k)
                                 n , which is modelled as zero-mean Gaussian and samples
are drawn from a distribution with covariance Σn . The reconstruction matrix R minimizes the
norm
                 [X̃t |0] − R[Yt |Yn ]2W ,                                                          (17)
                                                                                 (1)      (nT ) 
where [·|·] represents horizontal matrix concatenation and Yt =             1
                                                                                 yt · · · yt      , X̃t =
    (1)                                    (nN ) 
                                                                           nT
 1
nT
    x̃t · · · x̃(n
                t
                  T)
                       and Yn = n1N y(1)
                                     t · · · yt      . In this case, the matrix R which minimizes the
norm is
                 R = [X̃t |0][Yt |Yn ]T ([Yt |Yn ][Yt |Yn ]T )−1
                                              −1
                   = X̃t YTt Yt YTt + Yn YTn
                    = X̃t YTt (JΣx JT + Σn )−1 ,                                                    (18)
where samples Yt may be approximated from the Jacobian assuming the body is linear for
small targets. This formulation has the same generalized Tikhonov regularization term as that
of equation (12).

3.4. Selection of training data
Training data are selected as small, conductivity contrasting targets spread randomly and
uniformly in the plane of 3D model between electrodes. Vertical offsets above and below the
plane of 0.25× diameter of medium are allowed.
     The computational cost of calculating RGR does not change dramatically with the size of
the training data set. We therefore use a large number of training samples to avoid any training
bias. The minimum training set is much smaller, because, since the model is linear, the key
requirement is that the range of RGR be adequately represented, and it is limited to the number
of independent measurements, 12 nE × nV (which, for a 16-electrode system, is 104).

4. Methods: forward models

Training data for GREIT require a forward model which maps conductivity contrast targets, xt ,
to difference measurements, y. Forward models are built using 3D first-order tetrahedral finite
element, and solved using preconditioned linear solvers (Polydorides and Lionheart 2002).
Finite element models have been developed for four different geometries: male and female
adult chests, a neonatal chest and a cylinder. The cylindrical form may be used for phantom
studies and to image a pig thorax (which has a roughly circular cross section). Clearly, it is
possible to design optimized models for a given patient geometry, and this will offer improved
reconstructed images, with the added complexity of designing patient-specific FEM meshes.
Based on our experience with time-difference EIT, we feel that the four models provided offer
most of the accuracy of adaptive meshing.
     In the design of FEM models of the thorax, the following issues need to be considered.
  • Electrode placement. Several configurations of electrode types and placement are
    currently used. GREIT considers electrodes placed in a plane at a defined chest height
    perpendicular to the patient long axis. In the most common configuration, electrode 1 is
    placed on the sternum. Subsequent electrodes are placed on the left of the subject, spaced
    equidistantly around the chest. When viewing the EIT image, electrodes are numbered
    clockwise from the top centre and the subject is oriented so the feet would point out of
S48                                                                                      A Adler et al

    the image. Another common configuration places electrodes 1 and 16 on either side of
    the sternum and rotates the remaining electrodes accordingly.
    Electrodes placed at a mid-thoracic level show a good approximation of the global lung
    behaviour (Yang and Patterson 2007). There are two main strategies to select the electrode
    level. One practice is to place electrodes at a defined distance (a few centimetre in adults
    and millimetre in infants) below the nipple line, although this anatomical marker is
    somewhat variable for some female and larger or older male subjects. The other approach
    is to place the electrodes at the level of the sixth–seventh intercostal space at the parasternal
    line (which corresponds approximately to the nipple line). Other vertical placements have
    been reported: the tenth intercostal space (Coulombe et al 2005) and the upper chest at the
    third intercostal space to measure lung perfusion (Smit et al 2004). Placing electrodes too
    low may result in a large contribution of mediastinum or abdominal impedance changes
    in the centre of the EIT image.
  • Electrode size. Electrode size varies between applications. Lung EIT applications
    typically use standard Ag/AgCl ECG electrodes. For applications with custom EIT
    electrodes, it is common to use larger electrodes, in order to decrease variability in
    contact impedance. For infants, ECG-type electrodes are often trimmed so that they can
    fit on the small size chest. FEM models of the electrodes on the neonatal thorax must be
    adapted to account for the changes in contact impedance due to electrode trimming. The
    FEM models described in this paper use rectangular electrodes, but may be modifed for
    other electrode geometries.
  • FEM model size and refinement. Increasing the density of elements in the FEM model
    increases the accuracy of simulations. However, the simulation accuracy is limited by the
    boundary shape accuracy. We recommend that a minimum FEM model size of 25 000
    elements be used for simulation of GREIT training sets. The FEM mesh should be refined
    in the region of the electrodes, since the highest current densities occur here. Electrode
    models should use the complete electrode model (Cheng et al 1989). We also stress the
    importance of using 3D forward models, since 2D models cannot account for the true
    distribution of current in the body.
  • Conductivity simulations. Simulated targets are created at random positions which
    uniformly fill the medium in the electrode axis and a vertical range of one-fourth of
    the medium diameter. One important parameter is the use of an appropriate reference
    conductivity distribution σ r . The most common assumption for time difference EIT is
    that σ r is a uniform, homogeneous distribution. However, in a patient, the non-conductive
    lungs mean a smaller part of the stimulated current penetrates the body centre than would
    be predicted by a homogeneous distribution. The consequence is that lung contrasts are
    reduced and ‘pushed’ towards the medium centre. We suggest that simulations be made
    using σ r taken from a realistic model of subject conductivity distributions, which models
    the lower lung conductivity in the central region.


4.1. Adult models
Adult FEM models were generated from the visible human body dataset (Ackerman 1998)
which provides radiological and photographic images. The photographic images were used
to generate the surface models from which the finite element meshes were generated. The
surface models were created using AliasStudio (Autodesk) from the photographic images of
the thorax spaced 20 mm apart. The method used is similar to that used to generate models
of the human head for EIT of the brain function (Tizzard et al 2005). Rectangular electrodes
GREIT: linear EIT image reconstruction                                                                         S49




                 Figure 5. Left: one slice of the male photographic visible body dataset showing the modelled
                 B-spline curves of the boundary. There are two curves, modelling the left and right sides of the
                 boundary, tangentially blended. Right: the finished surface model of the male thorax ready for
                 exporting to the FE meshing software.




                 Figure 6. Finite element models of adult thoraces with rectangular electrodes. A wire frame
                 mesh of the surface finite elements is shown. Electrodes are shown in green, with a lighter colour
                 electrode 1. Left: female subject right: male subject.




of 20 × 40 mm2 were specified. Figure 5 shows an example of the B-spline curves generated
for one slice of the male subject.
     The final set of curves are used to generate the body surfaces which are then capped top and
bottom to form a closed volume. The finished surface model is exported to the mesh-generating
software which, in this case, is I-DEAS (Integrated Design Engineering Analysis Software).
I-DEAS has the tools to define electrode geometry easily prior to meshing, although any
meshing software could be used to achieve this, e.g. NETGEN (Schoberl 1997). The meshes
generated in I-DEAS were of similar resolution. The resulting FEM models are shown in
figure 6. For the male, the model comprised 27 170 elements and 5548 nodes. For the female,
these figures were 27073 and 5346, respectively. These data show that for the male, stretch
values were between 0.160 and 0.976, with a mean and SD of 0.698 and 0.109, respectively;
for the female, stretch values were between 0.198 and 0.982, with a mean and SD of 0.702
and 0.101, respectively.
S50                                                                                                    A Adler et al




                Figure 7. Left: finite element models of a neonatal thorax with rectangular electrodes. The figure
                shows a wire frame mesh of the surface finite elements (in green). Right: cylindrical FEM used
                for calculation of the main stimulation results of this paper. Image shows boundary elements
                below a cut plane. The turquoise circles indicate the positions of conductivity targets, xt , used in
                section 5.1.



    The models generated represent a high degree of accuracy of the boundary shape to a
male and female subject. One limitation is that the source dataset from the visible human
project was generated from cryogenically frozen cadavers and will therefore be subject to any
anatomical inconsistencies arising from the process.

4.2. Neonate models
The neonatal mesh (figure 7) was generated with the surface modelling technique used for
the adult models. The images were from x-ray CT, based on a dataset of an infant with
exomphalos. Due to the risks, CT data of healthy infants are not available. The modelling
was therefore subject to some assumptions regarding the boundary shape of a healthy subject.
Circular electrodes of 8 mm diameter were specified. The model, which consists of 23 747
elements and 5025 nodes, was that used for initial algorithm evaluation in Bayford et al (2007).


4.3. Cylindrial models
A cylindrical FEM model was generated which is suitable for simulations, phantom tank
experiments and is also a reasonable model for the thorax shape of common EIT experimental
animals, such as pigs. The FEM is generated using NETGEN (Schoberl 1997). The medium
diameter and height are 30 cm with a maximum element size of 1 cm. Circular electrodes
are defined by the intersection of the main cylinder with radial cylinders and electrode mesh
refinement is implemented by specifying a smaller maximum mesh size for each radial cylinder.
Figure 7 shows an image of the resulting mesh (with 124 052 tetrahedral elements) as well as
the positions of conductivity targets.

5. Evaluation

Evaluation is performed in two stages. First, algorithm performance is evaluated against the
figures or merit in section 2. Next, we compare to a representative set of data from simulations
GREIT: linear EIT image reconstruction                                                                           S51




                 Figure 8. Examples of simulated reconstructed images (red indicates conductive, while blue
                 indicates non-conductive changes) as a function of the simulated target position (left column,
                 in units of the radius fraction). Each row shows images reconstructed from the same small
                 conductivity target, xt , shown as a small turquoise circle. Left: Sheffield backprojection (RSBP ),
                 centre: Gauss–Newton (RGN ), right: GREIT (RGN ).




and experiments. All evaluation is performed on a 16-electrode EIT configuration using
adjacent current stimulation and voltage measurements.
     We compare three algorithms for normalized difference EIT: (1) Sheffield backprojection
(RSBP ), (2) Gauss–Newton reconstruction using a NOSER prior (RGN ) and (3) GREIT
(RGR ). RGN is chosen as representative of typical GN difference EIT solutions. In order
to standardize noise performance, each algorithm is set to NF = 0.5 at the medium centre.
This property is inherent to the implemented version of RSBP . For RGN , NF is set by adjusting
the hyperparameter λ, while for RGR , NF is set by adjusting the weighting w(k) of noise training
data yn . The value of λ is chosen using a bisection search.


5.1. Evaluation: performance figures or merit

We test each reconstruction matrix, R, for normalized difference EIT against the figures of
merit (section 2). Simulation data are generated from the cylindrical phantom as shown in
figure 7. Five hundred non-conductive targets with a diameter of 5% of the medium diameter
are simulated, in the plane of the electrodes, starting at the medium centre and progressing
radially outward. The simulated target is rotated by a fixed angle around the centre for each
sample in order to sample the entire FEM geometry.
     Figure 8 shows representative images at three different radial positions. Several effects
can be seen from these images. First, Sheffield backprojection performs well for targets that
are not too close to the medium boundary; near the boundary, it produces smearing artefacts.
GN reconstruction produces clear ringing artefacts, but otherwise shows good performance
with good resolution. GREIT gives slightly lower resolution than GN, but gives more constant
resolution with very little ringing artefacts, matching the consensus requirements.
     Figure 9 shows algorithm performance for each parameter as a function of the radial
position. The ‘noise’ that appears on each line is due to the discreteness of the FEM mesh
for simulation. There are larger oscillations near the boundary; this reflects variability in
performance as the target passes in front of and between the electrodes. Overall, all algorithms
perform well in the centre of the medium with poorer performance near the boundary.
S52                                                                                               A Adler et al



      AR



      PE



      RES



      SD



      RNG


               Figure 9. Algorithm performance against simulated tests as a function of the radial position. The
               radial position on each graph is from the centre (left) to the body boundary (right). Each column
               shows results from a different reconstruction algorithm. Left: Sheffield backprojection (RSBP ),
               centre: Gauss–Newton (RGN ), right: GREIT (RGR ) Each row shows a different parameter. From
               top to bottom: amplitude response (AR), position error (PE), resolution (RES), shape deformation
               (SD) and ringing (RNG).



In comparison to SBP and GN, GREIT shows either an equivalent or an improved ability
to meet the desired performance requirements.

5.2. Evaluation: representative data
In order to illustrate EIT image reconstructions with these algorithms, we calculate images
using RSBP , RGN , and RGR for two experiments in which the physiology corresponding to the
EIT images is well understood. Due to space constraints, other tests of GREIT are given on
the Internet at eidors.org/GREIT.
  • Recruitment manoeuvre in acute lung injury. These data were measured in an
    anaesthetized ventilated supine piglet as part of the study of Frerichs et al (2003) using the
    Goe MF II system and performed at the University of Göttingen, Germany. Acute lung
    injury was created by repeated bronchoalveolar lavage. EIT data were measured during
    a recruitment manoeuvre during which PEEP was raised and then lowered from 0 to
    30 cm H2 O in steps. Images are reconstructed of tidal ventilation at a PEEP of 10 cm H2
    O on the inflation and deflation segments of a recruitment manoeuvre. Measurements, vr
    and v, were calculated from average end-expiratory and end-inspiratory measurements,
    respectively, at the specified PEEP.
  • Regional pneumothorax/pleural effusion. These data were measured in anaesthetized
    ventilated supine pigs as part of the study of Hahn et al (2006) using the Goe MF II
    EIT system and performed at the University of Göttingen, Germany. Unilateral pleural
    effusion and pneumothorax was induced by injecting up to 300 ml of air or 300 ml of
    Ringer solution into the right side via a small incision made in the chest wall and a plastic
GREIT: linear EIT image reconstruction                                                                     S53




                 Figure 10. Images of ventilation in a pig with acute lung injury at a PEEP of 10 cm H2 O
                 shown (top row) on the inflation and (bottom row) deflation segments of a stepwise recruitment
                 and derecruitment manoeuvre (data from Frerichs et al 2003). Left: GREIT (RGN ), centre:
                 Gauss–Newton (RGN ), right: Sheffield backprojection (RSBP ).




                 Figure 11. Images of localized (top row) pneumothorax and (bottomm row) pleural effusion
                 in an anaesthetized, ventilated pig (data from Hahn et al (2006)). Left: GREIT (RGN ), centre:
                 Gauss–Newton (RGN ), right: Sheffield backprojection (RSBP ),



     canula and fixed by a suture and sealed by cyanoacrylate glue. Images are reconstructed
     of pneumothorax and pleural effusion. Measurement vr is calculated from an average
     signal at end-expiration before the intervention, while v is calculated at end-expiration
     during injection of air and fluid, respectively.

6. Discussion

This paper describes a unified approach to 2D linear EIT reconstruction of lung images, which
we call GREIT. This approach represents a consensus of a large and representative group of
experts in EIT algorithm design and clinical applications for pulmonary monitoring. The goal
S54                                                                                                   A Adler et al

of this work is to address the concern that most clinical and physiological research in lung EIT
is done using older and proprietary algorithms, which is an obstacle to interpretation of EIT
images because the reconstructed images are not well characterized.
     The approach consists of (1) detailed 3D finite element models of the thorax, (2) consensus
on the performance figures of merit and (3) an approach to fit the linear reconstruction matrix,
R, to the performance figures. In order of importance, figures of merit are (a) uniform
amplitude response, (b) small and uniform position error, (c) small ringing artefacts, (d)
uniform resolution, (e) limited shape deformation and (f) high resolution. Such figures of
merit are to be achieved with small noise amplification and small sensitivity to electrode
and boundary movement. The current work leaves several parameters of the algorithm
unspecified, including details on the selection of training data and required noise parameters.
We are currently undertaking clinical and experimental validation of the GREIT algorithm to
establish recommendations for these parameters. It is worth clarifying one disadvantage of the
regularized approach presented: Sheffield backprojection tends to map measurement artefacts
to ‘streaks’, while GREIT maps the same artefacts to ‘blobs’. It is easier for an operator to
note such streaks and identify the presence of data errors.
     All contributions from this work (algorithms, software, models and test data) have
been made available (eidors.org/GREIT) under an open source license which allows gratis
commercial and non-commercial use. Software to implement this algorithm is made available
under the GNU LGPL (Free Software Foundation 2007), which requires the source code
of any distributed modifications to be made available. FEM models, GREIT reconstruction
matrices (RGR ) and experimental and clinical data provided for evaluation of GREIT are
made available under the Creative Commons Attribution License (Creative Commons 2007).
Users are permitted to copy, distribute, transmit and adapt the works, under the condition of
attribution by citing the papers as indicated.


References

Ackerman M J 1998 The Visible Human Project Proc. IEEE 86 504–11
Adler A and Guardo R 1996 Electrical impedance tomography: regularized imaging and contrast detection IEEE
     Trans. Med. Imaging 15 170–9
Adler A, Guardo R and Berthiaume Y 1996 Impedance imaging of lung ventilation: do we need to account for chest
     expansion? IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 43 414–20
Adler A and Lionheart W R B 2006 Uses and abuses of EIDORS: an extensible software base for EIT Physiol.
     Meas. 27 S25–42
Barber D C 1989 A review of image reconstruction techniques for electrical impedance tomography Med. Phys.
      16 162–9
Barber D C and Brown B H 1984 Applied potential tomography J. Phys. E: Sci. Instrum. 17 723–33
Barber D C and Brown B H 1988 Errors in reconstruction of resistivity images using a linear reconstruction technique
     Clin. Phys. Physiol. Meas. 9 101–4
Bayford R H, Kantartzis P, Tizzard A, Yerworth R, Liatsis P and Demosthenous A 2008 Development of a neonate
     lung reconstruction algorithm using a wavelet AMG and estimated boundary form Physiol. Meas. 29 S125–38
Brown B H and Seagar A D 1987 The Sheffield data collection system Clin. Phys. Physiol. Meas. 8 91–7
Brown B W 2003 Electrical impedance tomography (EIT): a review J. Med. Eng. Technol. 27 97–108
Cheney M, Isaacson D, Newell J C, Simske S and Goble J C 1990 NOSER: an algorithm for solving the inverse
     conductivity problem Int. J. Imaging Syst. Technol. 2 66–75
Cheng K S, Newell J C and Gisser D G 1989 Electrode models for electric current computed tomography IEEE Trans.
     Biomed. Eng. 36 918–24
Cohen-Bacrie C, Goussard Y and Guardo R 1997 Regularized reconstruction in electrical impedance tomography
     using a variance uniformization constraint IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 16 562–71
Coulombe N, Gagnon H, Marquis F, Skrobik Y and Guardo R 2005 A parametric model of the relationship between
     EIT and total lung volume Physiol. Meas. 26 401–11
GREIT: linear EIT image reconstruction                                                                             S55

Creative Commons/Science Commons 2007 Creative Commons 3.0 Attribution License creativecommons.org/
      licenses/by/3.0/
Free Software Foundation 2007 GNU Lesser General Public License (GNU LGPL) version 3, 2a June 2007
      www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl.html
Frerichs I, Dargavillle P A, Dudykevych T and Rimensberger P M 2003 Electrical impedance tomography—a method
      for monitoring regional lung aeration and tidal volume distribution? Intensive Care Med. 29 2312–6
Gómez-Laberge C and Adler A 2008 Direct EIT Jacobian calculations for conductivity change and electrode movement
      Physiol. Meas. 29 S89–99
Hahn G, Dudykevych T, Frerichs I, Thiel F and Hellige G 2002 A high performance electrical impedance tomography
      (EIT) system for clinical evaluation studies and space application Proc. Conf. 2nd European Medical and
      Biological Engineering (Vienna, Austria) pp 110–1
Hahn G, Just A, Dittmar J and Hellige G 2008 Systematic errors of EIT systems determined by easily-scalable
      resistive phantoms Physiol. Meas. 29 S163–72
Hahn G, Just A, Dudykevych T, Frerichs I, Hinz J, Quintel M and Hellige G 2006 Imaging pathologic pulmonary air
      and fluid accumulation by functional and absolute EIT Physiol. Meas. 27 S187–98
Hartinger A E, Gagnon H and Guardo R 2007 Accounting for hardware imperfections in EIT image reconstruction
      algorithms Physiol. Meas. 28 13–S27
Lionheart W R B 2004 EIT reconstruction algorithms: pitfalls, challenges and recent developments Physiol. Meas.
       25 125–42
Oh S, Tang T and Sadleir R 2007 Quantitative analysis of shape change in electrical impedance tomography (EIT)
      IFMBE Proc. 17 424–7
Polydorides N and Lionheart W R B 2002 A Matlab toolkit for three-dimensional electrical impedance tomography:
      a contribution to the electrical impedance and diffuse optical reconstruction software project Meas. Sci.
      Technol. 13 1871–83
Santosa F and Vogelius M 1990 Backprojection algorithm for electrical impedance imaging SIAM J. Appl.
      Math. 50 216–43
Schoberl J 1997 NETGEN: an advancing front 2D/3D-mesh generator based on abstract rules Comput. Vis.
      Sci. 1 41–52
Smit H J, Vonk Noordegraaf A, Marcus R, Boonstra A, de Vries P M and Postmus P E 2004 Determinants of
      pulmonary perfusion measured by electrical impedance tomography Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 92 45–9
Soleimani M, Gómez-Laberge C and Adler A 2006 Imaging of conductivity changes and electrode movement in EIT
      Physiol. Meas. 27 S103–13
Tizzard A, Horesh L, Yerworth R J, Holder D S and Bayford R H 2005 Generating accurate finite element meshes
      for the forward model of the human head in EIT Physiol. Meas. 26 S251–61
Vauhkonen M, Vadàsz D, Karjalainen P A, Somersalo E and Kaipio J P 1998 Tikhonov regularization and prior
      information in electrical impedance tomography IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 17 285–93
Victorino J A et al 2004 Imbalances in regional lung ventilation: a validation study on electrical impedance tomography
      Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 169 791–800
Wheeler J L, Wang W and Tang M 2002 A comparison of methods for measurement of spatial resolution in two-
      dimensional circular EIT images Physiol. Meas. 23 169–76
Wolf G K, Grychtol B, van Genderingen H, Zurakowski D, Thompson J E and Arnold J H 2007 Regional lung
      volume changes in children with acute respiratory distress syndrome during a derecruitment maneuver Crit.
      Care Med. 35 1972–8
Yang F and Patterson R 2007 The contribution of the lungs to thoracic impedance measurements: a simulation study
      based on a high resolution finite difference model Physiol. Meas. 28 S153–63
Yorkey T J, Webster J G and Tompkins W J 1987 Comparing reconstruction algorithms for electrical impedance
      tomography IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 34 843–52
Zhang J and Patterson R P 2005 EIT images of ventilation: what contributes to the resistivity changes? Physiol.
      Meas. 26 S81–92
